Add Form Patterns Documentation (#1220)
hashicorp/design-system: website/docs/patterns/form-patterns/partials/guidelines/guidelines.md

![Grouping different field types](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/different-field-type.png)
!!!

Common grouping of fields can include:

- Credit card information; card number, expiration data, security code.
- Multi-line address field
- First and last name

#### Alignment

Fields organized in a horizontal group should be aligned to the baseline of each element to account for fields which have helper text.

![Baseline alignment within a group](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/baseline-alignment.png =500x*)

#### Multi-column layout

Grouping form elements horizontally creates a multi-column layout within the form. When grouping elements,

- use a consistent number of columns throughout the form; e.g., don't organize a group of fields in two-columns and another group in three-columns.
- don't exceed more than three fields in a horizontal group.
- fields should stack vertically when the width of the viewport and form container shrinks.

Multi-column layouts can be impacted by the width of the overall form. Use grouping logically based on the layout, width of the page, and overall UX strategy in the application.

### Text

> Sections consisting of text should use a 8px vertical gap between text elements.

Reviewer: I am not sure this is correct: if I look at the illustration above, I don't expect to see text-only sections. Maybe what we should say here is something like _"multiple* blocks of text within a section should use a 8px vertical gap..."_

(*) I think there is a better word, but I can't remember it, something like "subsequent" or something like that

Author: Yep, that's what I'm trying to say here, I'll update

![Example of a text section](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/text-section.png =600x*)

Text elements within a form should use logical, step-based sizing to reinforce hierarchy within sections, as well as within the form itself. While specifics around type hierarchy should be determined at the application level, adhering to these guidelines will help establish consistency both at the page level, and when constrained within another element or component.

<!-- TODO -->

### Actions

#### Button grouping

> Buttons should be grouped using the [ButtonSet](/components/button-set) guidelines, e.g., using a 16px horizontal gap between each button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Buttons should be grouped using the [ButtonSet](/components/button-set) guidelines, e.g. using a 16px horizontal gap between each button.
```

Reviewer: There are also other similar occurrences in the text, so is clearly intentional. Maybe double check with @KristinLBradley (I am not sure I've ever seen it used this way)

Author: I believe this was how @heatherlarsen was using "e.g." when part of a sentence. Is this right? ([For reference](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/know-your-latin-i-e-vs-e-g/])

Reviewer 2: I'm no grammar expert, but this is what Grammarly corrects it to, so that's what I've been using across the docs. The link @jorytindall shared has more details.

Reviewer 3: I would go by Grammarly and the linked reference on this one

Reviewer 4: Yes, the comma should stay there. 👍

Reviewer: OK, it's an American English vs British English thing. All good then :)

<img width="677" alt="screenshot_2442" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/686239/223101580-4f9482b7-5950-4219-a993-c4ada13e8fd4.png">

![Action grouping](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/action-group.png =500x*)

For more complex groupings of buttons, refer to the [Button alignment, grouping, and order](/patterns/button-alignment) pattern guidelines.

### Order and organization

Fields within a form generally fall into three categories that can help determine order and organization within a form. These categories don't exist in isolation but rather have a cumulative effect on how a user perceives a form and how likely they are to complete it.

#### Technical and application needs

> Sometimes the values or options for a given field are dependent on a prior field or piece of information provided to the application. These technical contraints within the application are often expressed three conditional logic within the form; determining what is displayed to the user depending on what has already been selected or input in previous fields.

Reviewer: "three" ??

Reviewer: also "depending" → "depends" ?

#### Multiple steps or pages

For exceedingly long, complex forms (e.g., creating a cluster), consider breaking the form into multiple steps or pages. A [Stepper](/components/stepper-indicator) can be used to annotate status and location in a multi-step form.

!!! Info

As a general note, special care should be taken to _reduce_ the number of fields whenever possible.

- Long forms are more challenging for the user which can result in a lower completion rate.
- If a field is optional, consider whether it should be included in the form at all. If the information isn't crucial to the experience or feature, why is it being collected at all?
!!!

#### Using dividers

Dividers introduce more visual hierarchy and differentiation in long, complex forms.

Only use dividers between sections of a form, not between fields or other smaller elements within a section. A divider should be used to break up different types of content and categories within a form.

> When using a divider, increase the spacing between sections to 48px from 32px (24px on the top and bottom of the divider). This helps to separate the divider from surrounding form elements, otherwise it can appear "attached" to a specific section or field.

Reviewer: Instead of saying "When using a divider, increase the spacing between sections" (which can be confusing) we can just say that the divider should have `24px` of margin above/below (it's the same thing, but it's simpler as a concept to understand)

## Spacing

Spacing between sections, fields, text, and other elements of a form should follow a decreasing scale based off of the 8px grid. This creates a consistent vertical rhythm between elements and reinforces a natural hierarchy and association between elements.

### Form

> A form wraps the content, fields, and actions while simultaneously handling the logic for submitting and action actions performed by the form. At a fundamental level, a form also acts as a layout mechanism, adding consistent spacing between sections.

Author: I took another stab at the content here to clean it up and add some context. I think it's important to keep this in as it validates the form as both something functional (handling the logic) as well as handling layout and spacing.

### Sections

A **section** occupies the largest hierarchy within the form and is used as a descriptive term for organizing combinations of text, form elements (inputs, checkboxes, toggles, etc), and actions. Even in the simplest of circumstances a form can consist of multiple sections with differing content, each receiving a 32px vertical gap in between.

![Example of multiple sections in a form](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/form-sections.png =450x*)

### Fields

A **field** is a broad term used to describe a form control and label pairing. When combined within a section there should be a 24px gap between each field.

> ![Example of multiple fields in a section](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/section-fields.png =450x*)

Author: I'll include this update in cleaning up the rest of the images to use a more consistent color palette

Fields can be further broken down into two types; text fields and data fields, each with it's own recommended usage and examples.

#### Text fields

> <!-- TODO -->

Author: I'm going to remove this for now as it's still WIP and captured for the future via [this ticket](https://hashicorp.atlassian.net/browse/HDS-1606?atlOrigin=eyJpIjoiN2EwNjYwMjU2ZTQ5NDY0MDgxNDg3ZTM1M2QwZjAzODIiLCJwIjoiaiJ9)

| [Radio Card](/components/form/radio-card) | Lorem ipsum | Lorem ipsum |
| [Select](/components/form/select) | Lorem ipsum | Lorem ipsum |
| [Toggle](/components/form/toggle) | Lorem ipsum | Lorem ipsum |

### Groups

Fields may be **grouped** together either horizontally or vertically if they are collecting related information or information that is part of the same object. Within a group there should bea  16px gap either horizontally (creating multiple columns), or vertically between each field.

![Example of fields grouped together](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/field-groups.png =450x*)

!!! Dont

Don't group (either horizontally or vertically) field types that are related but not of the same type, e.g., a text input and a toggle.

![Grouping different field types](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/different-field-type.png)
!!!

!!! Do

Instead, stack the fields vertically. 

![Grouping different field types](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/different-field-type-do.png =500x*)
!!!

Common grouping of fields can include:

- Credit card information; card number, expiration data, security code.
- Multi-line address field
- First and last name

#### Alignment

> Fields organized in a horizontal group should be aligned to the baseline of each element to account for fields which have helper text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fields organized in a horizontal group should be aligned to the baseline of each element to account for fields with helper text.
```

![Baseline alignment within a group](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/baseline-alignment.png =500x*)

> #### Multi-column layout

Reviewer 2: I see an opportunity to display visual do/don't blocks in this section to help consumers better comprehend this content. It can be a follow-up task, but I wanted to note it anyway because I think it would be a beneficial addition.

Author: Yep, that's a good idea. I added visuals and do/dont blocks here.

Grouping form elements horizontally creates a multi-column layout within the form. When grouping elements,

- use a consistent number of columns throughout the form; e.g., don't organize a group of fields in two-columns and another group in three-columns.
- don't exceed more than three fields in a horizontal group.
- fields should stack vertically when the width of the viewport and form container shrinks.

Multi-column layouts can be impacted by the width of the overall form. Use grouping logically based on the layout, width of the page, and overall UX strategy in the application.

### Text

In sections consisting of multiple blocks of text, an 8px vertical gap between text elements should be used.

![Example of a text section](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/text-section.png =600x*)

> Text elements within a form should use logical, step-based sizing to reinforce hierarchy within sections, as well as within the form itself. While specifics around type hierarchy should be determined at the application level, adhering to these guidelines will help establish consistency both at the page level, and when constrained within another element or component.

Author: This is the challenge that I've had with the content, it does mention spacing as it relates to text elements, but also mentions other elements when using text within a form. Maybe it makes sense to bubble it up higher to an `h2`

<!-- TODO -->

### Actions

#### Button grouping

Buttons should be grouped using the [ButtonSet](/components/button-set) guidelines, e.g., using a 16px horizontal gap between each button.

![Action grouping](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/action-group.png =500x*)

For more complex groupings of buttons, refer to the [Button alignment, grouping, and order](/patterns/button-alignment) pattern guidelines.

### Order and organization

> Fields within a form generally fall into three categories that can help determine order and organization within a form. These categories don't exist in isolation but rather have a cumulative effect on how a user perceives a form and how likely they are to complete it.

Author: Yep, makes sense!

Sometimes the values or options for a given field are dependent on a prior field or piece of information provided to the application. These technical contraints within the application are often expressed through conditional logic within the form to determine what is displayed to the user depending on what has already been selected or input in previous fields.

Fields that are dependencies for other fields generally benefit from being organized closer to the start of a the form; e.g., selecting a cluster tier, which reveals options for cluster size that are dependent on the tier.

![Dependencies within forms example](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/cluster-tier-size-options.png)

Read more about showing elements conditionally with [progressive disclosure](#progressive-disclosure).

#### User needs

Users benefit from logical grouping and progressive organization; organizing fields from easiest to hardest. This can help increase form completion by:

- giving the user a sense of accomplishment early on through "quick wins"
- reducing the probability of a user abandoning a form when they've already completed the "easier" segments.

#### Business needs

> <!-- TODO -->

Author: I've removed them for now since the follow-ups are captured in a ticket

- If a field is optional, consider whether it should be included in the form at all. If the information isn't crucial to the experience or feature, why is it being collected at all?
!!!

#### Using dividers

Dividers introduce more visual hierarchy and differentiation in long, complex forms.

Only use dividers between sections of a form, not between fields or other smaller elements within a section. A divider should be used to break up different types of content and categories within a form.

When using a divider, include a 24px gap above and below to separate the divider from surrounding form elements, otherwise it can appear "attached" to a specific section or field.

![Spacing using dividers](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/divider-spacing.png =500x*)

!!! Dont

Dividers should not be used trailing the last section of a form between the fields and the button set or actions. Instead, the section spacing of 32px should be used.
!!!

## Width

The width of a form and the fields it contains is largely dependent on the context the form is in, but adhering to these high-level guidelines can make a complex form approachable and introduce consistency in the UX.

#### Form width

> A form should hug the content and the fields it contains.

Author: Killed it

> ![Form width](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/form-width-example.png)

Reviewer 2: Can we provide more realistic examples? Plopping a radio card example within a credit card form feels a little weird.

#### Field width

> The width of a field within a form should be wide enough to account for the estimated width of the content it accepts. This gives the user an accurate sense of the length and type of the content the field accepts and is important in setting user expectations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generally, the width of a field should be wide enough to account for the estimated width of the content it accepts. This gives the user an accurate sense of the character length and type of content the field accepts and is important in setting user expectations.
```

#### Single column layout

> If a form uses a single-column layout, consider setting a maximum width on the form; this can generally be best achieved by using a size or unit that is **relative** the page, viewport, or container size. This can commonly be achieved by using a viewport width unit (`vw`), percentage width (e.g., `50%`), or a character unit (`ch`).

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason we aren't recommending single-column layouts? It feels like this is an easy opportunity for us to gain alignment across products.

Author: It might make sense to recommend this as the default starting point and only to diverge if absolutely necessary. I'll reword some of the content here and reorganize it

!!! Info

> The web is a fluid medium; a relative width will adjust based on the viewport and container width. Designing and building a form with a recommended maximum and minimum width will help to conceptualize the graceful expansion and contraction of the viewport

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The web is a fluid medium. A relative width will adjust based on the viewport and container width. Designing and building a form with a maximum and minimum width will ensure a graceful expansion and contraction within the viewport.
```

!!!

<!-- Constrained vs unconstrained -->

### Responsive properties

> As the viewport shrinks, the form width should expand relative to the viewport width, eventually occupying the entire width of the viewport or page. Horizontally grouped fields that result in a multi-column layout should stack vertically as the viewport shrinks.

Reviewer 2: I understand what you mean, but it took me a minute to wrap my head around it because it sounds backward. Wondering if a visual example could reduce confusion around this topic.

## Progressive disclosure

> Users want power, but also want simplicity. Progressive disclosure refers only displaying the most important information (or elements of a form) and conditionally showing additional fields depending on:

Reviewer 2: > Users want power

This feels like an odd statement to me. What are you really trying to convey here?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users want power but also simplicity. Progressive disclosure refers to only displaying the most important information (or elements of a form) and conditionally showing additional fields depending on:
```

Author: I have some beefing up to do on this content captured in [this ticket](https://hashicorp.atlassian.net/browse/HDS-1610), but essentially what I'm trying to say is progressive disclosure is a method that can be used to different levels of complexity within an experience depending on a number of different factors (settings the user has enabled, past behavior, customizable settings, etc).

1. the input state of other fields
2. if more complex settings are requested by the user.

> ## Required vs. optional fields

Reviewer 2: This is the heading used in the form component pages. 

```suggestion
## Required and optional
```

Displaying to the user what fields are required or optional can help users submit a form free of errors, but can also add visual weight the form.

- For shorter forms fields should be interpreted as required by default. Fields that are not required should be marked as optional.
- Don't mix required and optional labels, stick to one or the other. Using one method will imply that fields without a label are the inverse of whatever method you choose.

> When determining whether to mark fields as optional or required, consider which method occurs the least. This can help reduce visual weight since unmarked fields are implied as the inverse of marked fields.

Reviewer 2: This content is already available within the form component documentation (ref: [text input](https://helios.hashicorp.design/components/form/text-input#required-and-optional)) and can be used here directly. Let's ensure we're reusing existing content when it's available. 

This new guidance seems to differ slightly from the original guidance, so let's discuss it tomorrow.

> ![Comparison of forms using optional vs required](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/required-optional-comparison.png)

Reviewer 2: It feels like this visual would benefit from a do/don't distinction.

> <!-- Validation -->

Reviewer 2: This content is already written on the [Form Primitives](https://helios.hashicorp.design/components/form/primitives#error-validation) page. While I'm sure the content that's there could be expanded on _(later)_, it makes sense to move it here so it's with the rest of the pattern documentation.

Author: Killed it _for now_

### Width

The width of a form and the fields it contains are largely dependent on the context the form is in, but adhering to these high-level guidelines can make a complex form approachable and introduce consistency in the UX.

#### Field width

Generally, the width of a field should be wide enough to account for the estimated width of the content it accepts. This gives the user an accurate sense of the character length and type of content the field accepts and is important in setting user expectations.

#### Responsive properties

As the viewport shrinks, the form width should expand relative to the viewport width, eventually occupying the entire width of the viewport or page. Horizontal sets of fields that result in a multi-column layout should stack vertically as the viewport shrinks.

## Required and optional

For complex forms, indicate **required** fields. This is the most explicit and transparent method and ensures users don't have to make assumptions.

> For shorter, simpler forms, indicate optional fields instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For shorter, simpler forms, indicate **optional** fields instead.
```

!!!

!!! Dont

Don't exceed more than three fields in a horizontal set. In most scenarios it's best to limit the number of columns in a form or section to two.

![Three field maximum in a set](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/multi-column-three-fields-max.png =500x*)
!!!

!!! Do

Stack fields vertically when the width of the viewport and form container shrinks.

![Stack fields](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/multi-column-stacking.png =350x*)
!!!

The width of the overall form can impact multi-column layouts. Use set organization logically based on the layout, width of the page, and overall UX strategy in the application.

## Text

In sections consisting of multiple blocks of text, use an 8px vertical gap between elements.

![Example of a text section](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/text-section.png =600x*)

Text elements within a form should use logical, step-based sizing to reinforce hierarchy within sections and the form itself. While specifics around type hierarchy should be determined at the application level, adhering to these guidelines will help establish consistency at the page level and when constrained within another element or component.

## Actions

> ### Button sets

Reviewer 2: Do you anticipate more content being added to the "Actions" section? If not, it may help reduce the headings displayed in the sidecar to decide between "Actions" or "Button sets" as the singular heading for this content.

## Sizing

### Length

Since longer forms can result in a lower completion rate, we recommend looking for ways to reduce the overall number of fields whenever possible.

!!! Insight

If a field is optional, consider whether it’s actually needed in the form. If the information isn’t critical to the experience or feature, can the field be removed?
!!!

#### Multiple sections

Using sections based on the relationship between fields can make a longer form seem less complex. Introducing typographic elements and dividers can further aid the hierarchy of the form and differentiate sections from one another.

##### Using dividers

Dividers introduce more visual hierarchy and differentiation in longer, complex forms.

Use dividers to break up different types of content and categories within a form. Only use dividers between sections, not between fields.

!!! Do

Include a 24px gap above and below to separate the divider from the surrounding form elements; otherwise, it can appear "attached" to a specific section or field.

![Spacing using dividers](/assets/patterns/form-patterns/divider-spacing-do.png =500x*)
!!!

!!! Dont

> Don’t use dividers at the end of the last section between the fields and the button set or actions. Instead, use 32px of space.

Author: I revised this a bit, I think the images were actually what were lacking clarity so I updated them and broke out the "instead" statement into it's own block.
